Options documentation proposal (#386)
windmilleng/tilt.build: docs/flags.md

---
title: Tiltfile Flags and Args
layout: docs
---

> Tools offer flags and args to support the wide range of users needs and preferences, and dev workflows are no different. Devs on your team will want options in how they use Tilt; some are long-standing personal preferences and others will change in the middle of working on a Pull Request. With Tilt's user configuration system, you can improve a Tiltfile that encodes one standard setup to power the breadth of workflows your team needs:

Reviewer: This sentence, and this doc, feels weird in that it focuses on Laura in a way that our other docs don't. It might be unnecessarily exclusionary to readers.

Author: I agree it's geared towards that user, and intentionally. I think exclusionary has a negative connotation. Do you think someone else would not read it? I figured they'd read it understanding the perspective. I'm not sure how to write it well for another user.

* Maintainers choose the options to expose that make sense for their project
* Users can easily set and change options, without having to learn a Tiltfile

> * Tiltfile extensions expose the choices so they can power arbitrary customizations

Reviewer: What are Tiltfile extensions?

Author: Yeah, I'm not sure what to do with this sentence; parallelism is hard. Let me think a bit.

> This doc describes how you, the Dev Experience engineer who owns the Tiltfile, can offer this to your user, the App Developer who runs Tilt while they code. In order, we'll cover:

Reviewer: Is this a doc or is it a guide?

Author: What's the difference?

Reviewer: A guide is like a walk through or a tutorial, a doc describes functionality.

Author: I'm not familiar with this distinction; I think of doc as the parent type, and maybe there's a difference between guide and reference. Have we used this before?

* Jump into a mode quickly by adding flags and args on the command: `tilt up -- --key value`.
* Store long-lived preferences in a file named `tilt-config.json` so you don't have to remember to pass options on each invocation.
* Change options without having to restart/rebuild/redeploy: `tilt args -- --key value2` updates the running Tilt and reloads the config with the new value.
* Set options in existing scripts outside of Tilt. For example, a new-hire onboarding tool that provisions capacity and requests permissions can write that info to `tilt-config.json`.

## Defining and Using Options in the Tiltfile
In the Tiltfile, you interact with these options in 3 ways:
* Define options.
* Get option values.
* (Optional) Set results.

### Define Options
You define an option by calling `config.define_string_list`. (We plan to support more types beyond list of strings in the future, but are starting with just one type). This allows users to pass that as a flag on the command-line or as a field in `tilt-config.json`. You can also specify one option that is populated from any remaining args. In code:
```
# Flags
# Tiltfile

> config.define_string_list('foo')

Author: Yup, that's a great point.

  k8s_resource(...)
if 'be' in cfg['services']:
  docker_build(...)
  k8s_yaml(...)
  k8s_resource(...)
```

With the simpler:
```python
cfg = config.parse()
config.set_resources(cfg['services'])
```

## Examples

### Run only some services
Your app has many services, call them A, B, C, and D. You want users to be able to run only some of them.

and you want your users to be able to run only a subset of them. E.g., `tilt up` will run all services, but running `tilt up a b d` will run only the resources a, b, and d, ignoring c. Each run of Tilt will start from scratch.
#### Command-Lines
* `tilt up`: run all services
* `tilt up a b d`: run A, B, and D but not C
* `tilt args a b`: change running Tilt to run A and B but neither C nor D.
* `tilt up` (a second time): run all services

#### Tiltfile
```python
config.define_string_list("to-run", args=True)
cfg = config.parse()

config.set_resources(cfg['to-run'])
```

### Run a defined set of services
Your app has many services, call them A, B, C, and D. You have defined modes you want users to be able to start (e.g. consumer vs. enterprise) and you don't want them to have to remember which service is necessary for which mode.

> You want to be able to write a doc that tells users to run `tilt up consumer` the first time and know that's enough that they'll be set up. Running Tilt subsequent times without arguments should default to the mode they already have set.

Author: Cruft!!

#### Command-Lines
* `tilt up`: run all services
* `tilt up consumer`: run consumer services

#### Tiltfile
```python
config.define_string_list("to-run", args=True)
cfg = config.parse()

groups = {
  'consumer': ['a', 'b', 'c'],
  'enterprise': ['a', 'b', 'd'],
}

resources = []
for arg in cfg['args']:
  if arg in groups:
    resources += groups[arg]
  else:
    resources.append(r)
config.set_resources(resources)
```

### Specify services to edit

> You have many services that your users frequently need to run, but don't expect to edit. Your YAML includes good enough images. (Perhaps they're from a suitably recent CI invocation, or refer to standard images.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You have many services that your users frequently need to run, but don't expect to edit. You specify good-enough images in the YAML so your users can just pull them instead of building them. (Perhaps they're from a suitably recent CI invocation, or refer to standard images.) You add a `--to-edit` arg that allows users to specify which images should be built locally.
```

if 'a' in cfg['to-edit']:
  docker_build('a', './a')
if 'b' in cfg['to-edit']:
  docker_build('b', './b')
if 'c' in cfg['to-edit']:
  docker_build('c', './c')
if 'd' in cfg['to-edit']:
  docker_build('d', './d')
```

## How Options Work
Tilt stores options in a file next to the Tiltfile called `tilt-config.json`. When the Tiltfile executes `config.parse()`, it loads that file as JSON and merges the current args.

Any change to the flags file will cause Tilt to reexecute the Tiltfile. You can modify the flags file with an editor or write scripts that write values into it, and Tilt will update.

A call to `tilt args` will connect to the running Tilt instance on the server port and cause Tilt to reexecute the Tiltfile.

### Comparison to Default Behavior
If you don't call `config.parse`, Tilt's default behavior is to set resources to any (non-empty) passed args. The equivalent of a Tiltfile:
```python
config.define_string_list("args", args=True)
cfg = config.parse()
if cfg['args']:
  config.set_resources(cfg['args'])
```

## Future Directions
This section describes places we expect flags to go. Let us know if any of these would be particularly helpful to you and your team.

> 

Reviewer 2: do you want to pitch stickiness here?

Author: I'd be very very content if we just had "store args in file instead of in memory", which I think is a good experience and simpler.

Reviewer 2: maybe my question should be "is there something in that vein on which you'd like to solicit feedback here?"
